Convert targets 2 from dynamic to static (#25)
USGS-R/ds-pipelines-targets-2-course: course-instructions.md

> <details>

Reviewer: Expand first detail

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<details open>
```

<summary><h2>Overview</h2></summary>

**Welcome to the second installment of "introduction to data pipelines"** at USGS!! :sparkles:

> We're assuming you were able to navigate through the [intro-to-targets-pipelines](https://github.com/padilla410/ds-pipelines-targets-2course-static) course and that you learned a few things about organizing your code for readability, re-use, and collaboration. You were also introduced to two key things through the makefile: a way to program connections between functions, files, and phases and the concept of a dependency manager that skips parts of the workflow that don't need to be re-run. 

Reviewer: Update link

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We're assuming you were able to navigate through the [intro-to-targets-pipelines](https://github.com/DOI-USGS/ds-pipelines-targets-1-course) course and that you learned a few things about organizing your code for readability, re-use, and collaboration. You were also introduced to two key things through the makefile: a way to program connections between functions, files, and phases and the concept of a dependency manager that skips parts of the workflow that don't need to be re-run. 
```
```suggestion
We're assuming you were able to navigate through the [intro-to-targets-pipelines](https://github.com/padilla410/ds-pipelines-targets-2course-static) course and that you learned a few things about organizing your code for readability, re-use, and collaboration. You were also introduced to two key things through the makefile: a way to program connections between functions, files, and phases and the concept of a dependency manager that skips parts of the workflow that don't need to be re-run. 
```

> We're assuming you were able to navigate through the [intro-to-targets-pipelines](https://github.com/padilla410/ds-pipelines-targets-2course-static) course and that you learned a few things about organizing your code for readability, re-use, and collaboration. You were also introduced to two key things through the makefile: a way to program connections between functions, files, and phases and the concept of a dependency manager that skips parts of the workflow that don't need to be re-run. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We're assuming you were able to navigate through the [intro-to-targets-pipelines](https://github.com/DOI-USGS/ds-pipelines-targets-1-course) course and that you learned a few things about organizing your code for readability, re-use, and collaboration. You were also introduced to two key things through the makefile: a way to program connections between functions, files, and phases and the concept of a dependency manager that skips parts of the workflow that don't need to be re-run. 
```

---
### Recap of pipelines I

> First, a recap of key concepts that came from [intro-to-targets-pipelines](https://github.com/padilla410/ds-pipelines-targets-2course-static) :point_down:

Reviewer: Update link

Reviewer 2: I will update all links now that we are in the DGEC

#27

> First, a recap of key concepts that came from [intro-to-targets-pipelines](https://github.com/padilla410/ds-pipelines-targets-2course-static) :point_down:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, a recap of key concepts that came from [intro-to-targets-pipelines](https://github.com/DOI-USGS/ds-pipelines-targets-1-course) :point_down:
```

> - Data science work should be organized thoughtfully. As Jenny Bryan notes, "File organization and naming are powerful weapons against chaos".

Reviewer: Link to source of quote?

Reviewer 2: Borderline apocryphal - this quote is sprinkled around the internet ([here](https://uw-madison-aci.github.io/2016-08-23-uwmadison/assets/DC_day2intro.html#2), [here](https://bookdown.org/chesterismay/rbasics/5-rmdanal.html), and [here](https://github.com/kbroman/datasciquotes/blob/main/ReadMe.md)), but I'm struggling to find the time/place where she said it

Reviewer: `apocryphal` new vocab word

> - Capture all of the critical phases of project work with descriptive directories and function names, including how you "got" the data.

Reviewer: Why "got"?

Reviewer 2: Unknown. This was probably propagated from the scipiper training and probably intended to tonally match the "gotcha" theme

- Turn your scripts into a collection of functions, and modify your thinking to connect outputs from these functions ("targets") to generate your final product.

> - "Skip the work you don't need" by taking advantage of a dependency manager. There was a video that covered a bit of `make`, and you were asked to experiment with `targets`.

Reviewer: Add the key points from the video here.

Reviewer 2: #29

![add some friends](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2349007/81471981-c0094900-91ba-11ea-93b0-0ffd31ec4ea9.png)

<hr>

### Set up your local environment before continuing

During the course, we will ask you to build the pipeline, explore how to troubleshoot, and implement some of the best practices you are learning. To do this, you will work with the pipeline locally and commit/push your changes to GitHub for review. 

See details below for how to get started working with code and files that exist within the course repsository:

---

Open a git bash shell (Windows:diamond_shape_with_a_dot_inside:) or a terminal window (Mac:green_apple:) and change (`cd`) into the directory you work in for projects in R (for me, this is `~/Documents/R`). There, clone the repository and set your working directory to the new project folder that was created:

```
git clone git@github.com:<your-username-here>/ds-pipelines-targets-2-course-static.git
cd ds-pipelines-targets-2
```

> You can also open this project in RStudio by double-clicking the .Rproj file in the `ds-pipelines-targets-2` directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can open this project in RStudio by double-clicking the .Rproj file in the `ds-pipelines-targets-2` directory.
```

:star: Now you have the repository locally! Follow along with the commands introduced and make changes to the code as requested throughout the remainder of the course.

</details>

<hr> 

<details><summary><h2>How to get past the gotchas without getting gotten again</h2></summary>

In this course, we're going to go one by one through a series of tips that will help you avoid common pitfalls in pipelines. These tips will help you in the next sections and in future work. A quick list of what's to come:

- :mag: How to debug in a pipeline
- :eyes: Visualizing and understanding the status of dependencies in a pipeline
- :speech_balloon: `tar_visnetwork()` and `tar_outdated()` to further interrogate the status of pipeline targets
- :arrows_clockwise: What is a cyclical dependency and how do I avoid it?
- :warning: Undocumented file output from a function 
- :open_file_folder: Using a directory as a dependency 
- :clipboard: How do I know when to use an object vs a file target or even use a target at all? 
- :gear: USGS Data Science naming conventions
- :unlock: Final tips for smart pipelining

<hr>

> ### How to inspect parts of the pipeline and variables within functions

Reviewer: Is there any content that would be worth adding to this after the mural brainstorm on debugging in DSP?

Reviewer 2: I'll take a closer look with a bias toward "adding nothing" (thinking about info overload here) #29

Reviewer 2: Ok, I took a second look at this and have still decided "no" for targets II. We _could_ potentially consider adding it into targets III when we talk about dynamic branching, but I think it would be better suited to a future targets 4 lesson. Or we could point them to the targets manual (when using dynamic branches, it boils down to [workspaces](https://books.ropensci.org/targets/debugging.html#workspaces))

If you've written your own functions or scripts before, you may have run into the red breakpoint dot :red_circle: on the left side of your script window:

![breakpoint](https://support.rstudio.com/hc/en-us/article_attachments/201608458/editor-breakpoint.png)

Breakpoints allow you to run a function (or script) up until the line of the breakpoint, and then the evaluation pauses. You are able to inspect all variables available at that point in the evaluation, and even step carefully forward one line at a time. It is out of scope of this exercise to go through exactly how to use debuggers, but they are powerful and helpful tools. It would be a good idea to [read up on them](https://support.rstudio.com/hc/en-us/articles/205612627-Debugging-with-RStudio) if you haven't run into breakpoints yet. 

In `targets`, you can't set a breakpoint in the "normal" way, which would be clicking on the line number after you sourced the script. Instead, you need to use the other method for debugging in R, which requires adding the function call `browser()` to the line where you'd like the function call to stop and specifying an additional argument when you call `tar_make()`. 

> :warning: Check your RStudio version (go to the Help menu and click About RStudio). If you have a version earlier than v1.3.5, you may want to consider [updating RStudio](https://www.rstudio.com/products/rstudio/download/#download) before proceeding to have the smoothest experience in debugging mode. :warning:

Reviewer: This seems dated

Reviewer 2: I updated this to the most recent version of Rstudio as of 2023-06-14

```suggestion
:warning: Check your RStudio version (go to the Help menu and click About RStudio). If you have a version earlier than v2023.06.0+421, you may want to consider [updating RStudio](https://www.rstudio.com/products/rstudio/download/#download) before proceeding to have the smoothest experience in debugging mode. :warning:
```

![browser()](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2349007/82158816-bed9bb00-984f-11ea-8892-b2aeb5e4818d.png)

There is one more step to get your breakpoint to work in `targets`. You will need to add `callr_function = NULL` to your `tar_make()` call. When you run `tar_make(callr_function = NULL)`, you will land right in the middle of line 8. Give it a try on your own.

To navigate while in browser mode, you can use the buttons at the top of your console pane:

![debugnav](https://support.rstudio.com/hc/en-us/article_attachments/201594747/console-toolbar.png)

---

:keyboard: Place a `browser()` in the `for` loop of the `download_nwis_data()` function. Build the pipeline and compare the size of `data_out` through each iteration of the loop using the debugger navigational features. When you are done, don't forget to remove the `browser()` command from that function and then save the R script. Then, consider where you think you might find `browser()` handy in future pipelines. 

<hr>

> ### Visualizing and understanding the status of dependencies in a pipeline

Reviewer: There's a conceptual switch here. Consider creating another `<details>` section here.

Reviewer 2: #29

Seeing the structure of a pipeline as a visual is powerful. Viewing connections between targets and the direction data is flowing in can help you better understand the role of pipelines in data science work. Once you are more familiar with pipelines, using the same visuals can help you diagnose problems. 

> Below is a makefile that is very similar to the one you have in your code repository (the option configurations and `source` calls were removed for brevity, but they are unchanged):

Reviewer: I'm not seeing `_targets.R` in the repo.

Reviewer 2: Captured in #28

```r

p1_targets_list <- list(
  tar_target(
    site_data,
    download_nwis_data(),
  ),
  tar_target(
    site_info_csv,
    nwis_site_info(fileout = "1_fetch/out/site_info.csv", site_data),
    format = "file"
  ),
  tar_target(
    nwis_01427207_data_csv,
    download_nwis_site_data('1_fetch/out/nwis_01427207_data.csv'),
    format = "file"
  ),
  tar_target(
    nwis_01432160_data_csv,
    download_nwis_site_data('1_fetch/out/nwis_01432160_data.csv'),
    format = "file"
  )
)

p2_targets_list <- list(
  tar_target(
    site_data_clean, 
    process_data(site_data)
  ),
  tar_target(
    site_data_annotated,
    annotate_data(site_data_clean, site_filename = site_info_csv)
  ),
  tar_target(
    site_data_styled,
    style_data(site_data_annotated)
  )
)

p3_targets_list <- list(
  tar_target(
    figure_1_png,
    plot_nwis_timeseries(fileout = "3_visualize/out/figure_1.png", site_data_styled),
    format = "file"
  )
)

```

> Two file targets (`nwis_01427207_data_csv` and `nwis_01432160_data_csv`) were added to this makefile, but there were no changes to the functions, since `download_nwis_site_data()` already exists and is used to create a single file that contains water monitoring information for a single site. 

Reviewer: What is meant by "there were no changes to the functions"?

Reviewer 2: #29

---

#### tar_glimpse()

The `targets` package has a nice function called `tar_glimpse()` that we haven't covered yet (if you get an error when you try to use it, run `install.packages("visNetwork")` and then try again). It produces a dependency diagram for the target(s) you pass to the `allow` argument (it will show all of them by default). For this _modified_ makefile, calling that function with the default arguments produces:
```r
targets::tar_glimpse()
```
![glimpse_diagram](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/13220910/133107103-47735575-9f40-427e-b66c-32ba32102d91.png)

If you run the same command, you'll see something similar but the two new files won't be included. 

---

> Seeing this diagram helps develop a greater understanding of some of the earlier concepts from [intro-to-targets-pipelines](https://github.com/padilla410/intro-to-targets-pipelines). Here, you can clearly see the connection between `site_data` and `figure_1_png`. The figure_1 plot _needs_ all of the previous steps to have run in order to build. The arrows communicate the connections (or "dependencies") between targets, and if a target doesn't have any arrows connected to it, it isn't depended _on_ by another target and it doesn't depend _on_ any another targets. The two new .csv files are both examples of this, and in the image above they are floating around with no connections. A floater target like these two will still be built by `tar_make()` if they are included in the final target list (e.g., here they appear in `p1_targets_list` which is included in the final target list returned at the end of `_targets.R`)

Reviewer: update link

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Seeing this diagram helps develop a greater understanding of some of the earlier concepts from [intro-to-targets-pipelines](https://github.com/DOI-USGS/ds-pipelines-targets-1-course). Here, you can clearly see the connection between `site_data` and `figure_1_png`. The figure_1 plot _needs_ all of the previous steps to have run in order to build. The arrows communicate the connections (or "dependencies") between targets, and if a target doesn't have any arrows connected to it, it isn't depended _on_ by another target and it doesn't depend _on_ any another targets. The two new .csv files are both examples of this, and in the image above they are floating around with no connections. A floater target like these two will still be built by `tar_make()` if they are included in the final target list (e.g., here they appear in `p1_targets_list` which is included in the final target list returned at the end of `_targets.R`)
```

```
tar_visnetwork("3_visualize/out/figure_1.png")
```

![visnetwork_fxnchange](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/13220910/115302212-cd97b480-a127-11eb-9636-930ce7e02cb1.png)

In the case of fixed arguments, changing the argument names, values, _or even the order they are specified_ will create a change in the function definition and cause the output target to be considered outdated. Adding comments to the function code does not cause the function to be seen as changed.

---

:keyboard: using `tar_visnetwork()` and `tar_outdated()` can reveal unexpected connections between the target and the various dependencies. Comment on some of the different information you'd get from `tar_visnetwork()` that wouldn't be available in the output produced by `tar_glimpse()` or `tar_manifest()`.

<hr>

### What are cyclical dependencies and how to avoid them?

> Using `tar_visnetwork()` shows the dependency diagram of the pipeline. Look at previous comments to remind yourself of these visuals. 

Reviewer: Include the image here again and modify text to fit

Reviewer 2: #29

To depend on an input file, you first need to set up a simple target whose command returns the filepath of said file. Like so:

```
tar_target(my_metadata_csv, "1_fetch/in/my_metadata.csv", format = "file")
```

Now say you had a function that needed this metadata input file for plotting because it contains latitude and longitude for your sites. To depend on this file as input, do this:
```
tar_target(map_of_sites, make_a_map(metadata_file = my_metadata_csv))
```

but *NOT* like this (this would be the method that doesn't track changes to the file!):
```
tar_target(map_of_sites, make_a_map(metadata_file = "1_fetch/in/my_metadata.csv"))
```

As a general rule, do not put filepaths in the body of a function. :end:

<hr>

> ### How to depend on a directory for changes

Reviewer: This feels like a new section, and also a super important one

Reviewer 2: #29

You might have a project where there is a directory :file_folder: with a collection of files. To simplify the example, assume all of the files are `.csv` and have the same format. As part of the hypothetical project goals, these files need to be combined and formatted into a single plottable data.frame. 

In a data pipeline, we'd want assurance that any time the number of files changes, we'd rebuild the resulting data.frame. Likewise, if at any point the _contents_ of any one of the files changes, we'd also want to re-build the data.frame. 

This hypothetical example could be coded as 

```r
library(targets)

> source("combine_files.R")

Reviewer: This example seems simple enough that a `source()` fxn isn't really needed, and could write the process out in `tar_target()`. It's useful to see the consistent structure of `_targets.R` too, with the `source()`, so idk.

Is there a way to show the name of the file in the example? Like you would see: 
<img width="818" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/17803537/229395413-a9c321b6-073b-466c-b2e8-af0c405dce55.png">

Reviewer 2: #29

Reviewer 2: ~Ok! So now I have given this a second look. I want to reject this suggestion because~ I have been back and forth on this one! I have decided to add a screenshot here that gets at what you are after

Reviewer 2: Also, I did not want to combine the targets within the `tar_make` call - instead I included screenshots to clarify the calls to the manually written functions.

I would like to discourage work that looks like this:
```
tar_make(
  my_target,
  data |> 
    fitler(date, station, temp) |> 
    mutate(temp_c = convert_units(temp)) |> 
    another step |> 
    another step |> 
    etc
)
```

list(
  tar_target(in_files, 
             c('1_fetch/in/file1.csv',
               '1_fetch/in/file2.csv',
               '1_fetch/in/file3.csv'), 
             format = "file"),
  tar_target(
    plot_data, 
    combine_into_df(in_files)
  ),
  tar_target(figure_1_png, my_plot(plot_data))
)
```

While this solution would work, it is less than ideal because it doesn't scale well to **many** files, nor would it adapt to new files coming into the `1_fetch/in` directory :file_folder: (the pipeline coder would need to manually add file names to the `in_files` target).

---

> Lucky for us, the `targets` package can handle having a directory as a target. If you add a target for a directory, the pipeline will track changes to the directory and will rebuild if it detects changes to the contents a file, the name of a file, or the number of files in the directory changes. 

Reviewer: I don't use this enough

Reviewer 2: I'll be honest - I am skeptical of this target! I basically _always_ want to know what is going on with _every_ file - is that overkill? I just feel like I've been burned by this before. I'll give this a second look.

Reviewer 2: #29

---

</details>

<hr>

<details><summary><h2>Strategies for defining targets in data pipelines</h2></summary>

### How to make decisions on how many targets to use and how targets are defined

We've covered a lot of content about the rules of writing good pipelines, but pipelines are also very flexible! Pipelines can have as many or as few targets as you would like, and targets can be as big or as small as you would like. The key theme for all pipelines is that they are reproducible codebases to document your data analysis process for both humans and machines. In this next section, we will learn about how to make decisions related to the number and types of targets you add to a pipeline.

### Background 

> Isn't it satisfying to work through a fairly lengthy data workflow and then return to the project and it _just works_? For the past few years, we have been capturing the steps that go into creating results, figures, or tables appearing in data visualizations or research papers. There are recipes for reproducibility used in complex, collaborative modeling projects, such as in [this reservoir temperature modeling pipeline](https://code.usgs.gov/wma/wp/res-temperature-process-models) and in [this pipeline to manage downloads of forecasted meteorological driver data](https://code.usgs.gov/wma/wp/forecasted-met-drivers). _Note that you need to be able to access internal USGS websites to see these examples and these were developed early on in the Data Science adoption of `targets` so may not showcase all of our adopted best practices_.

Reviewer: This should be updated to reflect current work as well.

Reviewer 2: #29

  tar_target(temperature_all, get_wqp_data("temperature_all", wqp_config, map_config)),
  tar_target(secchi_lakes, get_wqp_data("secchi_lakes", wqp_config, map_config)),
  tar_target(secchi_all, get_wqp_data("secchi_all", wqp_config, map_config)),
)

# Summarize the data in a plot
p2_targets_list <- list(
  tar_target(
    multi_panel_constituents_png,
    plot_huc_panel(
      "figures/multi_panel_constituents.png", huc_map, map_config, 
      arsenic_lakes, arsenic_all, nitrogen_lakes, nitrogen_all, 
      phosphorus_lakes, phosphorus_all, secchi_lakes, secchi_all, 
      temperature_lakes, temperature_all
    ),
    format = "file")
)

# Combine all targets into a single list
c(p0_targets_list, p1_targets_list, p2_targets_list)
```

This makefile recipe generates a multipanel map, which colors [HUC8 watersheds](http://dep.wv.gov/WWE/getinvolved/sos/Documents/Basins/HUCprimer.pdf) according to how many sites within the watershed have data for various water quality constituents:
![multi_panel_constituents](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2349007/82117369-18999280-9735-11ea-8365-e58742c5ff7e.png)

---

> The `"figures/multi_panel_constituents.png"` figure takes a while to plot, so it is a somewhat "expensive" target to iterate on when it comes to style, size, colors, and layout (it takes 3 minutes to plot for me). But the plotting expense is dwarfed by the amount of time it takes to build each water quality data "object target", since `get_wqp_data` uses a web service that queries a large database and returns a result; the process of fetching the data can sometimes take over thirty minutes (`nitrogen_all` is a target that contains the locations of all of the sites that have nitrogen water quality data samples). 

Reviewer: 3 minutes doesn't seem too excessive to me for a multi-panel CONUS map.

Reviewer 2: #29 I'll revisit this language - 3 min definitely isn't. However, it's a balancing act when training people!

Alternatively, the `map_config*` object above builds in a fraction of second, and contains some simple information that is used to fetch and process the proper boundaries with the `get_mutate_HUC8s` function, and includes some plotting details for the final map (such as plotting color divisions).

> This example, although dated, represents a real project that caused us to think carefully about how many targets we use in a recipe and how complex their underlying functions are. Decisions related to targets are often motivated by the intent of the pipeline. In the case above, our intent at the time was to capture the data and processing behind the plot in the paper in order to satisfy our desire for reproducibility. 

Reviewer: I like this part

  tar_target(
    p1_obs_data,
    np$load(p1_obs_data_npy)
  )
)
```
Or maybe you wrote your own custom Python function and you want to use it in your `targets` pipeline. Great! Just import your function(s) and use them in your pipeline:  
```
# import custom Python functions 
prep_data_py = reticulate::import_from_path(module = 'prep_data', path = '2_model_prep/src/')

p2_targets_list = list(
  ...
  tar_target(
    p2_data_munged_npz,
    prep_data_py$prep_data(
      obs_file = p1_obs_data_npy,
      locations = p2_config[['model_loc']],
      start_model = p2_config[['start']],
      stop_model = p2_config[['stop']]),
    format = 'file'
  )
)

```

---

`targets` is part of the rOpenSci community of packages and is being used by a wide net of R users. If you have further questions, you can always consult a Data Science colleague, but also try Google and take advantage of the extensive documentation available in the [`targets` R Package User Manual](https://books.ropensci.org/targets/).

</details>

<hr>

<details><summary><h2>What's next</h2></summary>

You are awesome! :star2: :collision: :tropical_fish:

---

> We hope you've learned a lot in intro to pipelines II. We don't have additional exercises in this module, but we'd love to have a discussion if you have questions. 

Reviewer: Link to the next course

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We hope you've learned a lot in intro to pipelines II. We don't have additional exercises in this module, but we'd love to have a discussion if you have questions. 

When you're ready, move on to [pipelines III](https://github.com/DOI-USGS/ds-pipelines-targets-3-course).
```
